Digest option 2.5 (#1919)
httpwg/http-extensions: draft-ietf-httpbis-digest-headers.md

---

> title: Structured Digest Fields

Reviewer: I would keep that out of the title; it's a syntax detail.

Author: Fine by me!

Reviewer 2: Agreed, doesn't need to be in the title.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
title: Digest Fields
```

SEMANTICS}}).

This document obsoletes RFC 3230 and therefore the Digest and Want-Digest HTTP
fields; see {{obsolete-3230}}.

## Document Structure

This document is structured as follows:

- {{representation-digest}} defines the Representation-Digest request and response header and trailer field,
- {{content-digest}} defines the Content-Digest request and response header and trailer field,
- {{want-fields}} defines the Want-Representation-Digest and Want-Content-Digest request and response header and
  trailer field,
- {{algorithms}} describes algorithms and their relation to the fields defined in this document,
- {{state-changing-requests}} details computing representation digests,
- {{examples-unsolicited}} and {{examples-solicited}} provide examples of using
  Representation-Digest and Want-Representation-Digest.

## Concept Overview

The HTTP fields defined in this document can be used for HTTP integrity. Senders
choose a hashing algorithm and calculate a digest from an input related to the
HTTP message, the algorithm identifier and digest are transmitted in an HTTP
field. Receivers can validate the digest for integrity purposes. Hashing

> algorithms are registered in the HTTP Digest Algorithm Values Registry (see

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
algorithms are registered in the "Hash Algorithms for HTTP Digest Fields" (see
```

the entire selected `representation data` (see {{Section 8.1 of SEMANTICS}}).

Representations take into account the effect of the HTTP semantics on
messages. For example, the content can be affected by Range Requests or methods
such as HEAD, while the way the content is transferred "on the wire" is
dependent on other transformations (e.g. transfer codings for HTTP/1.1 - see
{{Section 6.1 of HTTP11}}). To help illustrate HTTP representation concepts,
several examples are provided in {{resource-representation}}.

When a message has no representation data it is still possible to assert that no
representation data was sent computing the representation digest on an empty
string (see {{usage-in-signatures}}).

`Representation-Digest` is a Structured Fields Dictionary (see {{Section 3.2 of
STRUCTURED-FIELDS}}):

~~~ abnf
Representation-Digest   = sf-dictionary
~~~

`Representation-Digest` member-keys convey the hashing algorithm (see
{{algorithms}}) used to compute the digest. Member-values are the output
of the digest calculation. Member-values MUST be of type sf-binary.

For example:

~~~ http-message
Representation-Digest: sha-512=:WZDPaVn/7XgHaAy8pmojAkGWoRx2UFChF41A2svX+TaPm

>                 AbwAgBWnrIiYllu7BNNyealdVLvRwE\nmTHWXvJwew==:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                AbwAgBWnrIiYllu7BNNyealdVLvRwEmTHWXvJwew==:
```
typo

Reviewer 3: :shrug:

| -------------- | -------- | ----------------------------------- | -------------- |
| Algorithm Key  | Status   | Description                         | Reference(s)   |
| -------------- | -------- | ----------------------------------- | --------- |
| sha-512        | standard | The SHA-512 algorithm.              | [RFC6234], [RFC4648], this document. |
| sha-256        | standard | The SHA-256 algorithm.              | [RFC6234], [RFC4648], this document. |
| md5            | insecure | The MD5 algorithm. It is vulnerable to collision attacks; see {{NO-MD5}} and [CMU-836068] | [RFC1321], [RFC4648], this document. |
| sha            | insecure | The SHA-1 algorithm. It is vulnerable to collision attacks; see {{NO-SHA}} and [IACR-2020-014] | [RFC3174], [RFC4648], [RFC6234] this document. |
| unixsum        | insecure | The algorithm used by the UNIX "sum" command. | [RFC4648], [RFC6234], [UNIX], this document. |
| unixcksum      | insecure | The algorithm used by the UNIX "cksum" command. | [RFC4648], [RFC6234], [UNIX], this document. |
| adler          | insecure | The ADLER32 algorithm.                          | [RFC1950], this document. |

> | crc32          | insecure | The CRC32c algorithm.                           | {{!RFC4960}} appendix B, this document. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| crc32c         | insecure | The CRC32c algorithm.                           | {{!RFC4960}} appendix B, this document. |
```

Author: I agree with the change of algorithm name, but I'll hold off merging to avoid the conversation being resolved and hard to find.

- {{content-digest}} defines the Content-Digest request and response header and trailer field,
- {{want-fields}} defines the Want-Representation-Digest and Want-Content-Digest request and response header and
  trailer field,
- {{algorithms}} describes algorithms and their relation to the fields defined in this document,
- {{state-changing-requests}} details computing representation digests,
- {{examples-unsolicited}} and {{examples-solicited}} provide examples of using
  Representation-Digest and Want-Representation-Digest.

## Concept Overview

The HTTP fields defined in this document can be used for HTTP integrity. Senders
choose a hashing algorithm and calculate a digest from an input related to the
HTTP message, the algorithm identifier and digest are transmitted in an HTTP
field. Receivers can validate the digest for integrity purposes. Hashing
algorithms are registered in the "Hash Algorithms for HTTP Digest Fields" (see
{{algorithms}}).

Selecting the data on which digests are calculated depends on the use case of
HTTP messages. This document provides different headers for HTTP representation

> data and HTTP content.

Reviewer 4: These concepts really need to be defined.  Probably right here.

Reviewer 3: @martinthomson these concepts are defined in SEMANTICS and referenced in Notational Convention. There's an Annex explaining this stuff too. Am I missing something?

To ease this kind of work, I filed an issue on kramdown-rfc2629 that could help simplifying referencing concepts when using markdown. https://github.com/cabo/kramdown-rfc2629/issues/155

Reviewer 4: I was looking for a citation right here.  It seemed like the right place for it.  Given how critical they are, it seems prudent to cite the relevant sections of {{SEMANTICS}} right here.

Author: The HTML makes this easier to reason about. In https://httpwg.org/http-extensions/draft-ietf-httpbis-digest-headers.html#name-introduction. We cite the relevant sections in the next paragraphs. Part of the editorial work on reordering sections will refactoring things a little and sort out citing at the earliest and kost convenient time

informative:
  RFC2818:
  HTTP11: I-D.ietf-httpbis-messaging
  PATCH: RFC5789

--- abstract

This document defines HTTP fields that support integrity checksums. The
Representation-Digest field can be used for the integrity of HTTP
representations. The Content-Digest field can be used for the integrity of

> HTTP message content. Want-Representation-Digest and Want-Content-Digest can be

Reviewer 4: Later you put content integrity first with representation integrity second.  Here, it's the other way around.  Maybe try to make that consistent.  (I'd prefer content-first ordering if it came down to a coin toss.)

Author: Ah I know what's happened here. I started on the path of putting content digest in my local copy. However, I soon realized that to keep it consistent I would need to propogate changes through the document, which was very disruptive and not critical to this proposal. I thought I unwound all those changes, I missed this bit, sorry. 

I think the ordering of concepts should be tracked in a seperate ticket, WDYT?

> used to indicate a sender's interest and preferences for receiving respective integrity fields.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
used to indicate a sender's interest and preferences for receiving the respective
integrity fields.
```

> This document obsoletes RFC 3230 and therefore the Digest and Wants-Digest HTTP

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This document obsoletes RFC 3230 and the Digest and Want-Digest HTTP
```

fields.

--- middle

# Introduction

HTTP does not define the means to protect the data integrity of representations
or content. When HTTP messages are transferred between endpoints, lower layer
features or properties such as TCP checksums or TLS records [RFC2818] can provide
some integrity protection. However, transport-oriented integrity provides a
limited utility because it is opaque to the application layer and only covers
the extent of a single connection. HTTP messages often travel over a chain of
separate connections, in between connections there is a possibility for
unintended or malicious data corruption. An HTTP integrity mechanism can provide
the means for endpoints, or applications using HTTP, to detect data corruption
and make a choice about how to act on it. An example use case is to aid
fault detection and diagnosis across system boundaries.

This document defines two digest integrity mechanisms for HTTP.
First, content integrity, which acts on conveyed content ({{Section 6.4 of
SEMANTICS}}).
Second, representation data integrity, which acts on representation data ({{Section 3.2
of SEMANTICS}}). This supports more advanced use cases such as validating the

> integrity of a resource the was reconstructed from parts retrieved using

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
integrity of a resource that was reconstructed from parts retrieved using
```

multiple requests or connections.

> This document obsoletes RFC 3230 and therefore the Digest and Wants-Digest HTTP

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document obsoletes RFC 3230 and therefore the Digest and Want-Digest HTTP
```

Reviewer 4: This is a repeat of before, so

```suggestion
This document obsoletes RFC 3230 and the Digest and Want-Digest HTTP
```

fields; see {{obsolete-3230}}.

## Document Structure

This document is structured as follows:

- {{representation-digest}} defines the Representation-Digest request and response header and trailer field,
- {{content-digest}} defines the Content-Digest request and response header and trailer field,
- {{want-fields}} defines the Want-Representation-Digest and Want-Content-Digest request and response header and
  trailer field,
- {{algorithms}} describes algorithms and their relation to the fields defined in this document,
- {{state-changing-requests}} details computing representation digests,
- {{examples-unsolicited}} and {{examples-solicited}} provide examples of using
  Representation-Digest and Want-Representation-Digest.

## Concept Overview

The HTTP fields defined in this document can be used for HTTP integrity. Senders

> choose a hashing algorithm and calculate a checksum from an input related to the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
choose a hashing algorithm and calculate a digest from an input related to the
```

"checksum" has a particular meaning, where I *think* digest is more generic.

Reviewer 3: @martinthomson is `hash` ok?

> HTTP message, the algorithm identifier and checksum are transmitted in an HTTP

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
HTTP message. The algorithm identifier and digest are transmitted in an HTTP
```

> field. Receivers can validate the checksum for integrity purposes. Hashing

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
field. Receivers can validate the digest for integrity purposes. Digest
```

algorithms are registered in the HTTP Digest Algorithm Values Registry (see
{{algorithms}}).

> Selecting the data on which checksums are calculated depends on the use case of

Reviewer 4: I'll stop here, but here's another one.

HTTP messages. This document provides different headers for HTTP representation
data and HTTP content.

> This document defines the `Representation-Digest` request and response header
> and trailer field ({{representation-digest}}) that contains a checksum value

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This document defines the `Representation-Digest` field ({{representation-digest}}) that contains a value
```

Author: That's a decent suggestion, let's track it in https://github.com/httpwg/http-extensions/issues/1941

dependent on other transformations (e.g. transfer codings for HTTP/1.1 - see
{{Section 6.1 of HTTP11}}). To help illustrate HTTP representation concepts,
several examples are provided in {{resource-representation}}.

When a message has no representation data it is still possible to assert that no
representation data was sent computing the representation digest on an empty
string (see {{usage-in-signatures}}).

`Representation-Digest` is a Structured Fields Dictionary (see {{Section 3.2 of
STRUCTURED-FIELDS}}):

~~~ abnf
Representation-Digest   = sf-dictionary
~~~

`Representation-Digest` member-keys convey the hashing algorithm (see
{{algorithms}}) used to compute the checksum. Member-values are the the output
of the checksum calculation. Member-values MUST be of type sf-binary.

For example:

~~~ http-message
Representation-Digest: sha-512=:WZDPaVn/7XgHaAy8pmojAkGWoRx2UFChF41A2svX+TaPm
                AbwAgBWnrIiYllu7BNNyealdVLvRwE\nmTHWXvJwew==:
~~~

Since `Representation-Digest` is a Dictionary, it can contain multiple
members. This could be used, for example, to attach multiple checksums
calculated using different hashing algorithms in order to support a population

> of endpoints with different evolving capabilities. Such an approach could

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
of endpoints with different or evolving capabilities. Such an approach could
```

will ignore it.

`Representation-Digest` can be sent in a trailer section.
In this case,
`Representation-Digest` MAY be merged into the header section; see {{Section 6.5.1 of SEMANTICS}}.

# The Content-Digest Field {#content-digest}

The `Content-Digest` HTTP field can be used in requests and responses to
communicate checksums that are calculated using a hashing algorithm applied to
the actual message content (see {{Section 6.4 of SEMANTICS}}). It is a
Structured Fields Dictionary (see {{Section 3.2 of STRUCTURED-FIELDS}}):

~~~ abnf
Content-Digest   = sf-dictionary
~~~

`Content-Digest` member-keys convey the hashing algorithm (see {{algorithms}})
used to compute the checksum. Member-values are the the output of the checksum
calculation. Member-values MUST be of type sf-binary.

For example:

~~~ http-message
Content-Digest: sha-512=:WZDPaVn/7XgHaAy8pmojAkGWoRx2UFChF41A2svX+TaPm
                        AbwAgBWnrIiYllu7BNNyealdVLvRwE\nmTHWXvJwew==:
~~~

Since `Content-Digest` is a Dictionary, it can contain multiple
members. This could be used, for example, to attach multiple checksums
calculated using different hashing algorithms in order to support a population

> of endpoints with different evolving capabilities. Such an approach could

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
of endpoints with different or evolving capabilities. Such an approach could
```

with a range of HTTP fields.

Registrations MUST include the following fields:

 - Algorithm: a friendly name of the algorithm
 - Description: a short description of the algorithm
 - Algorithm Key: the Structured Fields key value used in
   `Representation-Digest`, `Content-Digest`, `Want-Representation-Digest` or
    `Want-Content-Digest` field Dictionary member keys
 - Status: the status of the algorithm.
     Use "standard" for standardized algorithms without known problems;
     "experimental" or some other appropriate value
     - e.g. according to the type and status of the primary document
     in which the algorithm is defined;
     "insecure" when the algorithm is insecure;
     "reserved" when the algorithm references a reserved token value
 - Reference: a set of pointers to the primary documents defining the algorithm
   and key

Insecure digest algorithms MAY be used to preserve integrity against corruption, but MUST
NOT be used in a potentially adversarial setting; for example, when signing digest fields' values for
authenticity.

The registry is initialized with the algorithms listed below.

  {: vspace="0"}

>   SHA-512

Reviewer 4: Did you really have to all-caps these?  sf-dictionary keys are lcalpha.

Also, sf-dictionary keys, as lcalpha, don't allow hyphens...

Author: Honest truth, I never liked the style of table initialization that digest used. You'll see that in the old text we have a list of "things" that then define the values for columns in https://www.iana.org/assignments/http-dig-alg/http-dig-alg.xhtml. Is the "thing" the algorithm (SHA-512) or is it the token (sha-512), it's ambiguous.

In 
What's in here is a hangover from proposal two which needed several columns to address the old and new header algo identifer. Because of the above ambiguity, I tried to change things. But it's not really needed here. I think we should just switch to a table format and it would make things clearer.

Reviewer 4: Oh, I see what you were doing here.  I don't much mind.  I guess it's good because the change meant that I noticed the hyphen issue, which is a real problem.  The formatting I will leave to you.

Author: yeah I clearly messed up the algo key thing, I'll get that fixed up thank you

Reviewer 5: Just a note, sf-dictionary keys :do: allow hyphens, but not as the first character:

```
key           = ( lcalpha / "*" )
                *( lcalpha / DIGIT / "_" / "-" / "." / "*" )
```

Author: hehe. So I guess we can stick with `sha-nnn` or drop the hypen. I don't really are much either way.

Reviewer 4: Ah. Saved. I misread the text.

This document defines two digest integrity mechanisms for HTTP.
First, content integrity, which acts on conveyed content ({{Section 6.4 of
SEMANTICS}}).
Second, representation data integrity, which acts on representation data ({{Section 3.2
of SEMANTICS}}). This supports more advanced use cases such as validating the
integrity of a resource that was reconstructed from parts retrieved using
multiple requests or connections.

This document obsoletes RFC 3230 and therefore the Digest and Want-Digest HTTP
fields; see {{obsolete-3230}}.

## Document Structure

This document is structured as follows:

- {{representation-digest}} defines the Representation-Digest request and response header and trailer field,
- {{content-digest}} defines the Content-Digest request and response header and trailer field,
- {{want-fields}} defines the Want-Representation-Digest and Want-Content-Digest request and response header and
  trailer field,
- {{algorithms}} describes algorithms and their relation to the fields defined in this document,
- {{state-changing-requests}} details computing representation digests,
- {{examples-unsolicited}} and {{examples-solicited}} provide examples of using

>   Representation-Digest and Want-Representation-Digest.

Reviewer 3: @LPardue do we need it?

Author: I'd keep it for now at least.

In responses, instead, the representation digest will be computed on the selected
representation of the patched resource.

## Representation-Digest and Content-Location in Responses {#digest-and-content-location}

When a state-changing method returns the `Content-Location` header field, the
enclosed representation refers to the resource identified by its value and
`Representation-Digest` is computed accordingly. An example is given in {{post-not-request-uri}}.

# Security Considerations

> ## HTTP Messages are not protected in full

Reviewer 2: Use title case here, rather than sentence case?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## HTTP Messages Are Not Protected In Full
```

Digital signatures are widely used together with checksums to provide the
certain identification of the origin of a message [NIST800-32]. Such signatures
can protect one or more HTTP fields and there are additional considerations when
`Representation-Digest` or `Content-Digest` is included in this set.

Checksums explicitly
depend on the "representation metadata" (e.g. the values of `Content-Type`,
`Content-Encoding` etc). A signature that protects `Representation-Digest` but not other
"representation metadata" can expose the communication to tampering. For
example, an actor could manipulate the `Content-Type` field-value and cause a
digest validation failure at the recipient, preventing the application from
accessing the representation. Such an attack consumes the resources of both
endpoints. See also {{digest-and-content-location}}.

Digest fields SHOULD always be used over a connection that provides integrity at

> the transport layer that protects HTTP fields.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
the transport layer to protect HTTP fields from modification.
```

Separately, this could be read to imply that a TCP checksum is sufficient.  I'm not enthusiastic about that, but...ok.

Author: Your comment applies to the current version of the document too. we were kind of trying to lump TCP and TLS (transport layer security) together here. Maybe we can rephrase things but I would like to track that independendently of the proposal wholesale.

Author: tracked in #1940

> A `Representation-Digest` field using NOT RECOMMENDED hashing algorithms SHOULD NOT be used in

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A `Representation-Digest` field using insecure hashing algorithms MUST NOT be used in
```

Author: This seems out of scope for this proposal. Unless you really mean to suggest that for new Digest fields we should say MUST NOT. But that goes agaisnt the design we agreed where people that want to use MD5 can. I made  https://github.com/httpwg/http-extensions/issues/1929 to track this seperately.

## Algorithm Agility

The security properties of hashing algorithms are not fixed.
Algorithm Agility (see {{?RFC7696}}) is achieved by providing implementations with flexibility
to choose hashing algorithms from the IANA Hash Algorithms for HTTP Digest Fields registry; see
{{establish-hash-algorithm-registry}}.

> To help endpoints distinguish weaker algorithms from stronger ones,
> this document adds to the IANA Digest Algorithm Values registry

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

The old table is not updated anymore

# IANA Considerations

## Establish the HTTP Structured Digest Algorithm Values Registry {#iana-digest-algorithm-registry}

> This memo sets this specification to be the establishing document for the [HTTP Structured Digest

Reviewer 2: Should we also formally close the old registry?

Author: Thanks, you've highlighted an issue with section I'd missed. 

Other options tried to update the old registry. That's not the case here, I'm proposing a new registry and I need to update the text that does that to read better.

I don't know what the formalities for closing a registry are in relation to an obsoleted header. Does that mean it vanishes from IANA (seems bad), or that it can no longer have new entries added to it, or something else?

Reviewer 3: @mnot any hint for this?

Author: Paging @mnot again to test his email filters

Reviewer 6: Ah, it's `mention@`, not `mentions` -- try again?

Author: @mnot please answer the question 😉

Reviewer 6: It works!

Oh, the *question*. Right. I don't know that anything needs to happen to the registry, unless you want to close it down (i.e., not allow updates). If that's the case, you should say so in IANA considerations. Generally a lot of this gets negotiated tweaked later in the process when IANA does their review.

Content-Type: application/json
Content-Encoding: br
Content-Location: /items/123
Representation-Digest: sha-256=:4REjxQ4yrqUVicfSKYNO/cF9zNj5ANbzgDZt3/h3Qxo=:,
        sha-512=:pxo7aYzcGI88pnDnoSmAnaOEVys0MABhgvHY9+VI+ElE6
                0jBCwnMPyA/s3NF3ZO5oIWA7lf8ukk+\n5KJzm3p5og==:

> 
> iwiAeyJoZWxsbyI6ICJ3b3JsZCJ9Aw==

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

iwiAeyJoZWxsbyI6ICJ3b3JsZCJ9Aw==
```

typo

Author: what is the typo here? it looks identical to me

Reviewer 3: Yes, my mistake.
